---
title: "Jesus, Starting Point for Faith"
date: "2013-05-12"
categories: 
  - "evangelism"
---

I remember a conversation that happened on two different occasions in my seminary classes. Or maybe it was a deja vu situation, but I'm pretty it actually happened twice. The general statement was something like this: "I don't have any problem believing that God exists, but believing that Jesus was anything special is a lot harder." It stuck with me because, to put it as bluntly as possible, I'm the exact opposite: I _could_ make the philosophical case against God's existence, especially if we make certain assumptions about God as most descendants from Greek philosophy do, but one thing I can't do is ignore Jesus.

<!--more-->I think my classmate is in the majority, though, especially in more pluralistic contexts like Canada. We have a natural impulse toward something more than just the material life. We see beauty and have a hard time agreeing that there is no higher purpose to it than an evolutionary prerogative. Most don't draw any kind of conclusions about what this God is like - although we might assume certain things, again primarily that we inherited from Greek philosophy such as existing outside of time and being perfectly morally good - but most people inherently are drawn to the idea of some form of God or gods. It's not that I don't have this impulse. I definitely do.

But there is another side, a side which I think is more prominent for me. Why is that so many major magazines still cover stories about Jesus, even in countries where a small percent are practicing Christians? Why do we often hear non-Christians echo words similar to Gandhi's: "I'm a fan of your Christ, just not your Christians"? In short, **I think that it is a lot harder to deny that there is something special about Jesus than we like to pretend**. That radical love in his teachings, even toward the enemy empire that was keeping down his people - God's chosen people - under control through force. That radical love in his example upon the cross. The destruction of oppressive boundaries between the so-called saints and the so-called sinners.

This relates to [another recent post about using Jesus' teaching as the starting point for apologetics](http://anabaptistredux.com/teaching-apologetics/ "Teaching Apologetics"). That makes complete sense to me because to me Jesus' teachings stand out as so remarkable, as I said in that post, but also because that's the part of the Christian faith that is attractive to me. Yes, I am a theologian by training. Yes, I have wrestled with the challenges posed to the Christian worldview and I do believe that the Christian worldview provides the best explanations of the world in an intellectual sense, too. And I have that general spiritual impulse. But if you ask me why I am a Christian, the most honest answer all comes down to the person of Jesus: a life and teachings so remarkable that they changed human history and have changed the lives of millions of people.
